# Cally Amisola's Repository for Open Source Software in Practice (CS4387)
## 👩🏻‍💻 Biography
Welcome to my repo! I'm Cally Amisola, a Senior at Bennington College (as of the Fall 2024 semester) studying Computer Science, Design, and New Media. I took this course to acquire more coding experience and — for the first time — engage in open-source communties, practices, and contributions. You can find me on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/cally-amisola/) or [my website](https://www.callypso.design/).

## 👤 List of Solo Fixes
From Week 10 onwards, I began working on some fixes independently.
- _p5.JS Web Editor_'s Issue with [Illegible Text on Dark/High Contrast Mode](https://github.com/bennColl-cs4387/camisola/blob/055d9183834e9aad2b1b8c235eb3d5d779e124c9/Solo%20Fixes/SOLO_FIX1.md)
- _Kestra_'s Issue with [Unnecessary Background Behind Text](https://github.com/bennColl-cs4387/camisola/blob/055d9183834e9aad2b1b8c235eb3d5d779e124c9/Solo%20Fixes/SOLO_FIX2.md)

## 👥 Group Fix
From Weeks 7-9, Nath Freires and I worked collaboratively on _p5.JS Website_ [Issue 516](https://github.com/processing/p5.js-website/issues/516) concerning the layout responsiveness, wherein certain text and/or classes are cut off when the website is viewed on screens with smaller width. Nath and I's code for this fix can be found in our shared [forked repository](https://github.com/callybton/p5.js-website), which is described in our [report](https://docs.google.com/document/d/197LLvZXauJRpocG0KSUylJNpRxrUTCShBL1Q2TjmeAY/edit?tab=t.0). Doing this Group Fix not only gave me my first insights into building from source and reading & understanding other people's codebase, but also on how collaborative programming enables faster debugging and exploring multiple versatile solutions.

## 📝 Essay
In weeks 6-7, I began planning more thoroughly for my first (individual) fix and detailed it all in a proposal essay. 
- [Link to Essay](https://github.com/bennColl-cs4387/camisola/blob/e60b0c91cbd015c9c6902a7c2f25cd6ae4d889e5/Assignments/ESSAY_FIRSTISSUE.md)

## 🧠 Learnings
Despite previous coding experience and using or depending on countless open source applications and programming languages, I had never engaged in open-source communities, practices, and contributing prior to this course. I began this entirely from step one. Looking back at the beginning of the semester, I can see evidently how much I have learned since then. The combined theoretical discussions, research-based assignments and homework, and hands-on practice (both my own and from just seeing and listening to my classmates’ experiences) rendered me with much understanding and insight into open source practices.

Weeks 1-3 were dedicated to becoming comfortable with version control, Git, and Github, which proved to be a comprehensive and necessary foundation for the following weeks. In Week 4, we began to explore, read, and attempt to understand different open source codebases, thinking and planning ahead for a potential first contribution. For this, I decided to look at different JavaScript- and Python-based repositories that had several open beginner-friendly issues; I was particularly drawn to projects that I already use (or were similar to them), such as the creative coding tool p5.JS. Week 5 was then devoted solely to building open source codebases, wherein we built any of the codebases we were previously looking at locally and implemented a change to it. For this, I built p5.JS’ Web Editor and experimented with altering the styling rules. For Week 6, we researched and investigated more thoroughly the codebase and issue we were hoping to fix: looking at the main contributors/foundation, code of conduct, documentation, the issue’s technical and socio-historic details, and more — all of which are important open source contribution practices. By Week 7, we got more hands-on experience and began to properly work on our fixes.

Pain points concerning all from debugging, to interacting with the project’s community, to making a Pull Request first arose with building from source, then were present when working on the group and solo fixes. I would have trouble building codebases locally due to dependency issues and compilation errors, but these were (generally) eventually resolved. And while I had expected debugging setbacks, I had not expected to also be blocked by UX design-related concerns, navigating labeled and unlabelled issues, interacting with project communities of lower activity, and knowing if and when to ask to be assigned to an issue. Nevertheless, these were all enlightening and inevitable moments in contributing to open source software.

Ultimately, I had learned, grown, and developed significantly since the beginning of the semester. With more time, I would have loved to also experiment with making open source contributions outside of bug fixes: documentation, feature requests, and other opportunities.
