
# Essay on First Issue
The essay found [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BT3jD6oapb_U4kwUh6DhZh4Fp5CczKFvKWgYlMn_LFY/edit?usp=sharing) discusses a potential open-source issue that I might attempt to solve, and my proposed solution for doing so. The full essay is also available below.
## p5.JS Issue 1852
_p5.JS_ is one of the most popular tools for “creative coding.” It is a free and open-source library where Javascript is used to draw and produce audio-visual, interactive, and experimental artworks for the web. Put simply, JavaScript functions are used to sketch digital works. It was created in 2013 by Lauren Lee McCarthy, an artist and programmer with an educational background in both Computer Science and Art and Design. It began as a “new interpretation” of Processing.js — or the JavaScript library that translates Processing code to JavaScript to be embedded on the web — but has then become its own independent project with a shared community. In recent years, p5.JS has been led by artists and creative technologists Qianqian Ye and Rachel Lim. Other core contributors, alumni, and mentors have diverse backgrounds across fields of art, design, programming, and media studies. 

Over 600 people have contributed to _p5.JS_’ primary Github repository, and new issues or feature requests are regularly opened. The overall p5.JS project also expands to other Github repositories, [p5.js Web Editor](https://github.com/processing/p5.js-web-editor) and [p5.JS Website](https://github.com/processing/p5.js-website), that also have a relatively high amount of activity (200+ and 40+ open issues respectively). The general code of conduct welcomes community contributions and discussion, but emphasizes accessibility above all. Their [client-facing](https://p5js.org/reference/) and [contributor-facing](https://p5js.org/contribute/) documentation is thus clear and expansive, incorporating visual examples and tutorials. Opportunities to get involved range from actual source code contribution, developing tutorials, teaching workshops on using the library itself, hosting exhibitions of p5.JS works, monetary donations, and more.  

Given my own background in the intersections of art and technology, I am particularly drawn to the _p5.JS_ codebase as the site for my first open-source contribution. I have relatively great familiarity with JavaScript, and my programming experience is primarily within web-based contexts and projects. Furthermore, each p5.JS Github repository also has several “Good First Issue”s available for those new and eager for source code contributions. Considering my personal interests and technical background, I believe there is much potential for me to work on a p5.JS fix.

Looking through the [p5.JS Web Editor](https://github.com/processing/p5.js-web-editor) Github repository, there were a number of open issues labeled with “Bug” and “Good First Issue.” I found [Issue 1852](https://github.com/processing/p5.js-web-editor/issues/1852), concerning the default background and/or text colors when users switch between different accessibility view modes. The p5.JS Web Editor settings provide users the option to toggle between Light versus Dark mode and Regular Contrast versus High Contrast mode. When Dark mode or High Contrast mode are toggled on, default black text appears on a default dark background — making it difficult or impossible for users to discern the preview window of their p5.JS code. The bug is easily reproducible by writing a p5.JS sketch incorporating text output, toggling on ‘Dark’ mode or ‘High Contrast’ mode in the theme settings, and running the code. I was able to do so on the main p5.JS web editor, and on my own local host after building the codebase from source.

Issue 1852 has been open since 2021. While several others have attempted to fix it over the years, no pull requests have been merged as the proposed solutions only created new user experience issues. Common proposed fixes were to change the default background color of the preview window to white if ‘Dark’ mode or ‘High Contrast’ mode are on, but the lead maintainers raised this would be cause for a confusing user experience. This fix did not distinguish clearly enough between when the user’s code was running or not. The community then proposed having the default background color of the preview window to switch to white only when the user’s code was running, but the lead maintainers contended that the design issue would need further consideration. Another proposed fix was to change the default color of the text in the preview window to white if ‘Dark’ mode or ‘High Contrast’ mode are on. The lead maintainers agreed that this fix was a step closer to the ideal solution, but they also raised their uncertainties on whether it would be appropriate or not to alter a user’s code to this degree. Ultimately, none of the pull requests have been merged — with all of the attempts being closed. 

After taking into consideration the lead maintainers’ comments, reading the different pull requests, and looking through the project files, I was able to come up with my own solution for an attempted fix. I plan to ensure that the styling rules of the preview window always align with the styling rules of whichever view mode (‘Light’, ‘Dark’, or ‘High Contrast’) mode is toggled on — whether or not the code is running — to maintain consistency and readability. I also plan to adjust or add override rules so that users still have the agency to alter the default text color back to black in ‘Dark’ or ‘High Contrast’ modes.

This issue lies in the JavaScript and CSS files, but is also a user experience/design issue. It requires a technical fix but with careful design considerations, having been opened for years with no determined solution — which is largely why I am interested in it. I believe this fix would be a great opportunity to both work at other people’s code and be mindful of the logic and accessibility rules.
